Headline:
Campaigners call for more support in erosion battle.

MainText:
Campaigners fighting to save clifftop homes have been exploring new schemes to tackle erosion and ways to raise funds, but said more support was needed to deliver possible solutions.

The Pakefield Coast Protection Community Interest Company (PCPCIC) in Suffolk was set up after three chalets were demolished in November 2023.

Directors of the PCPCIC said action was needed as soon as possible to stop more homes being lost to the sea, especially with winter storms looming.

They suggested transferring rocks from a nearby defence scheme at Benacre, but coastline managers said that would not be feasible at present, although they said rocks placed on Pakefield beach in 2022 were providing "temporary protection" to the community. 
Clive Crossley, a director of the PCPCIC who lives close to the cliff edge at Pakefield, said: "Coastal communities are not that well supported. We are hoping to keep the status quo as it is, but action is needed now to stop further erosion.

"It's been two years since the rocks were put in place and they have worked well, but it's unfortunate we couldn't get the amount we wanted and we now need more rocks to stop erosion happening to the north and south of the current defences.

"We are hoping to attract funding for future defence schemes but we need to get more support and ideas on the table to make this happen."

PCPCIC director John Pitts said: "I think it's so important for the people who live here that something is done in the short term because coastal erosion is just happening so fast.

"We've lost so much land in the past six years and the movement of more rocks here as soon as possible is crucial for people living here."
Campaigners had researched a plan to transfer granite rock from nearby Benacre which they said might not be needed once a more robust defence scheme was built involving steel pilings, to help protect the A12.

They hoped some of the rocks could then be used at Pakefield, but an East Suffolk Council spokesperson said: "The project at Benacre is ongoing and not expected to be complete for three to five years, until which time no rock can be removed and its future disposal would ultimately be at the discretion of the Environment Agency and the private landowner.

"We have been working with affected communities, and with other government agencies, to explore available options to reduce the risk of erosion along the East Suffolk coast.

"Erosion rates at Pakefield have exceeded all predictions and the local community is understandably very concerned.

"A rock solution was put in place in December 2022, funded by East Suffolk Council and the Defra-supported Resilient Coasts project, but this was only a temporary measure and is likely to come under more pressure as erosion rates potentially increase."

The council said medium and longer-term rock solutions had been considered for Pakefield and presented to the community, but it said "the funding needed to complete works to enable rock to be in place for the 20 to 30 years would require significant external contribution from the community".

"We will continue to support the community at risk and prioritise keeping people safe, including focusing resources on emergency planning and incident response protocols for the winter."
